133
Note that adjectival noun roots inflected for person are also
derived with //il// //al/, so that these stems are not,
strictly speaking, adjectival stems, but rather substantive
noun stems. Examples of the personal inflection of noun
stems are: //hin-xólom // my head, //w-?ók // my foot, //w-
híkap' // my sand, //ha-p'íh// your name, //h-?íp // your
strength, //h-háp'-il-al// your age, //s-méšah // his table,
//s-k'án-il// its yellow parts, ///y-ím // her breast, //3-
hów-al // his fight, //ko-čítam // our pig, //k-?íšim // our
maize, //k-hú?m // our paper, //he-túmat /// y'all's tomato,
//hey-?ítax // y'all's greens, //hey-hí?h// y'all's young
maize sprout.
The plurality of the possessor of a noun stem inflect-
ed for possession by a third person subject is optionally
expressed by the suffixation of //hep' // to the noun stem.
Alternatively, the plurality of the possessor may be expressed
by pluralizing the phrase which specifies that possessor.
Examples of the pluralization of possessed noun stems are:
//s-pát-hep' // their house, //s-čex-hep¹ // their animal,
//s-pát hep'-wẤN // the house of the men, //s-čéx hep '-?íš //
the animal of the women. The suffixation of //hep' // to noun
stems not associated with a specifier--body parts, for example--
is ambiguous, as this construction may also indicate the
plurality of the possessed stem rather than that of the pos-
sessor. Examples are: //hin-k'áp'-hep' // my hands, //s-k'áp'
hep' // his hands or their hands.