feest
125
singular and plural addressees, respectively) also occur.
Compound imperatives are formed by prefixing //?íš // go or
//?úl // come to other imperatives; these have the meanings
go do this or come do this. Examples of imperatives are:
//mák ¹-ha? /// hit it!, //16-oh// eat it!, //páy-ex// dry it
with heat!, ///cíl-č-it-ex// tear it up!, //čám-aN // die!,
//č'áy-n-aš-aN // get wet!, //'ém-aN k'óx-an // sit down!,
//pay-w-aN-Năl // dry maize by heat!, //čóy-p¹-aN // relax!
(become loose!), //1ó?-?ěm-ih // eat it down there!, //pay-
ex-?ěl-ih // extract it by heating!, //wáy-aN-kăn-?ém-ih //
sleep down there!, //mún-1-ax-aN-kăn-?ém-ih// stay working
down there!, //?íš-ló?-?ěm-ih// go eat it down there!, //?íš-
lú?m-ex ha-p'áh // go dirty yourself!, //?úl-Nús-š-ih // come
burn it again!.
Verbal suffix position +3 is filled by the imperative
plural marker //ek//, which forms plural imperatives from
imperatives based on both transitive and intransitive stems.
Note that the occurrence of ///ek // prevents the occurrence
of the transitive verb clitics. Examples of plural impera-
tives are: //mil-ek // y'all kill it!, //čám-aN-ek // y'all
die!, //púk-aš-aN-ek // y'all scatter! (be divided!), //pay-
w-aN-ek-Năl // y'all dry maize by heating!, //páy-ex-ek-?él-
ih // y'all extract it by heating!, //mún-l-ax-aN-ek-kán-ih //
y'all work here!, //?íš-ló?-ek-?ém-ih // y'all go eat it down
there!, //'úl-Nús-ek-š-ih // y'all come burn it again!.
Verbal suffix position +4 is filled by the suffixes of
repetition, //(i)š // and //páš //, which indicate a single rep-